# chargeIT
Ada Cohort 4 Capstone Project

Electric vehicles are only as clean as the energy that fuels them.
Power Trip will text you when your energy is the cleanest.


##The Problem

In our electrical grids in America, there is almost no real-time storage. Thus, for every user of electricity, there must be an equal amount of electricity produced by the grid. Balancing authorities are the operators responsible for matching the demand for electricity to the supply of power. Balancing authorities have the agency to decide which power plants, called marginal plants will produce more to meet the extra demand for electricity, called marginal power. These marginal plants get their fuel sources from drastically varied sources.

However, if we could time our usage of electricity so that it coicides when marginal power is from the cleanest of sources, we would alter our personal contribution to pollution in a remarkable way.

WattTime, a nonprofit software company, has revolutionary new programs that analzye the power grid to identify, report, and predict when a balancing authority has clean energy - in real time.

"We would alter our personal contribution to pollution in a remarkable way"

##But Why?

As electric car drivers, our electricity consumption for just transportation is about the aggregate load of a household, typically between 3 kW and 8 kW. This consumption is not as time dependent as other uses of electricity like lighting or heating. As long as our cars get charged, we can charge them whenever. So why not wait until the grid is particularly clean?

The alternative can be quite counterintutive. For example, much of the electricity in America is generated by coal-fired plants, which are the biggest polluter, releasing 2.1 lbs of CO2 for every kWh they produce. Since the fuel economy of a light EV is about 3 miles / kWh, they emit 0.7 lbs of CO2 per mile. Gasoline, however, releases about 20 lbs of CO2 per gallon, not counting the energy it takes to refine gasoline. But still, a traditional car with a fuel economy of 35 MPG would release 0.57 lbs of CO2 per mile - which is less than an electric vehicle.

"As long as our cars get charged, we can charge them whenever. So why not wait until the grid is particularly clean?"

##What We Can Do

To remedy this, we can charge our cars with only the cleanest 'marginal fuel' available; wind, solar, thermal energy and more are available in many areas...as long as you know when and where to look. The cleanest times on the grid can be counterintuitive; for example, coal is the primary marginal fuel for almost half the US, meaning that they respond to the changes in electricity demand. In the midwest at night, most capacity is provided by these coal powered plants, but in the evenings gas-fired plants prevail. Thus, charging after midnight would emit 30-40% more CO2 than charging in the evening. The emissions data depends on where you live and changes every five minutes - we just have to keep looking.

WattTime has an ever watchful eye on the grids, and Power Trip will check with them and let you know when to charge your car. Sign up on our site with your zip code and phone number, and we'll send you a text when your local energy is clean. It's as easy as that.
